welcome to topcast and question number
eight in my series of questions for
david and today it's a question about
direct observation at least in part i'm
leaving you on a bit of a cliffhanger so
that i can bring in question number nine
but for this question direct observation
popper introduced this concept of
observation being theory laden this idea
that we don't directly observe anything
we don't just extract knowledge from our
observations of the environment instead
we conjecture the knowledge and the
purpose of observations on this view is
to then decide between the guesses that
we conjecture about the nature of
reality certainly in the case of science
anyway and i of course was not immune to
this particular way of thinking i
remember quite clearly thinking that the
idea of science for example was that you
went out into the world and you observe
stuff and from your observations then
you extract the knowledge in some way
you derive the knowledge
from your observations i think i picked
this up probably
from my schooling and indeed in schools
today to some extent at least it's very
heavy on observations there is i suppose
a
virtuous form to some extent of
observation and science of course there
is you need to observe in science but
where we need to begin is our guess
about the nature of reality and even in
schools they do go through this
hypothesis formation process and then
you go about testing that hypothesis
against data that you collect of course
that's where the problems begin because
then the data leads you usually at least
the way it's taught in schools down an
inductivist path of trying to find a
trend and then assuming the trend
goes on forever and this is false of
course but this whole notion about
looking at something and thinking that
through looking at something you know
the true nature of something is a
mistake even though you think well how
could it be otherwise i look at the tree
and i see the green leaves on the tree
it is a leaf isn't it
well it very well could be
but the process of seeing the green leaf
is a complex process as far as we know
what's going on is light is shining from
the sun
it's being reflected off the leaf not
all of it just the green bits and the
green bits enter your eye and by
entering the i mean they are absorbed
firstly by the front of the eye and then
through the lens of the eye and finally
they reach the retina of the eye where
they are absorbed again and at this
point they cause complex changes in
chemicals and these chemicals bend and
warp and in doing so release electrical
signals along the nerve fibers connected
to the retina leading to the optic nerve
and finally end up in the brain where
they're interpreted so this idea of
seeing something directly well there's a
lot of layers of explanation between
what's going on with the actual photons
of light that apparently your eye is
detecting
and what you end up interpreting in
terms of electrical crackles as david
likes to say between the neurons inside
your brain so
without further ado let's get into this
question a short one for today and this
uh once one it becomes at least somewhat
familiar with the
worldview that you've presented in your
books and with popper's worldview it's
it's very difficult to try and reimagine
what people mean by
directly observe
i i struggle now to try and conceive of
what one really means when they say well
there are certain things you can just
observe you can just see
but on explaining to them well let's
think about what that whole process of
seeing actually consists of of photons
you know being absorbed and then
re-emitted back towards the eye and then
being converted into electrical signals
which then go into your brain this this
whole concept of direct observation
actually itself vanishes into
a cloud of explanation not so much a
cloud but a a kind of way of
understanding the world that denies the
possibility of direct observation i
don't even know what someone really
intends by this terminology this way of
denying the reality of things which we
don't have direct obs
don't have direct access to when we
don't have direct access to anything
even i would uh tentatively argue that
even the contents of our own minds i
agree uh
in a way the contents of our own minds
are
quite a highly sophisticated kind of
knowledge that we only know through
an extensive chain of interpretations
um some of which are notoriously
unreliable you know even in everyday
language we we we know what we mean when
we say
you're just fooling yourself
or
the content of those
ideas
is incompatible with
empiricism with the idea that knowledge
reliable knowledge comes from the senses
and i think what people regard that as
just one of those things you know it's
it's it's one of the mysteries of nature
it's it's the problem with induction or
something like that
um
and
you say it's hard to imagine
what people mean when they
when they talk about um
direct observation
it's interesting that that concept of
also had to be invented at one time
and in fact it was quite a liberation
when it was first invented
like in various stages there was there
was
empiricism in in the john locke sense
is relatively recent but but the idea
that we can gain knowledge
by looking at the world which is false
was these concepts of knowledge and
looking and reliable and that kind of
thing
they they didn't
they're not built into our genes
somebody invented those concepts and at
the time when they invented them they
were an improvement
on this on something that was more vague
and more false than that
trust the authority
or something similar for example
yes but there was a time when you didn't
even have to say trust the authorities
trusting the authorities was just the
way that the world was and nobody
bothered to put that into words
um it was that reminds me of the divine
right of kings which is a concept that
was invented only after the authority of
kings was questioned
yes well this all raises the fact that
there is this creativity going on this
creation of
concepts in order to try and come to
better understand the world
that is the uniquely creative capacity
of the human mind and mind itself
how do you understand the nature of mind
i sometimes think of it as
this abstraction i think you've said
this to me it's a it's a it's a it's a
funny kind of abstraction it's an
abstraction that itself needs to be
instantiated in matter but also needs to
be running it can't just be like any
other piece of knowledge which you can
transmit from one place to another in
different physical forms and that's one
way of understanding what knowledge is
it allows itself to continue to persist
over time
and to get itself copied to get itself
replicated but our mind a human mind
this thing that is enabling the creation
of this knowledge
it itself
is
an unusual kind of abstraction how do
you think of it at the moment